Oh my gosh, everybody, the recording
you're about to see
exceeded my expectations over and over
throughout this conversation that you're
about to listen to.
I wanted to cry. I had to fight back the
tears. And so many people, sometimes
when they go to my presentations or they
listen to a channeling session, they
say, "Why did I just want to cry?"
Everybody, that's your soul saying,
"This is truth."
I'm so glad you're listening to this.
You're about to hear truth at a very
deep level, and I hope it makes you cry.
I hope it helps you awaken to who we
are, why we're here, and why it all
matters. Enjoy.
Hi, everybody. I am so excited for
today's interview. I know I've been
doing live podcasts lately with Q&A and
bringing all of you on the screen to
chat, but today I have an opportunity to
interview someone who I have respected
for years. But in all honesty, I've been
afraid. My human side has way, afraid to
discuss his book on this website. Just
thinking about it makes me a little
shaky, and you know, we always talk
about in the Awaken Way we're both
humans and souls. And my soul knows
there is nothing to fear, but the human
side said, "Oh my god, we're going to
talk about psychedelics." And that is a
topic that I have not talked about for
good reason.
For 46 combined years, my husband and I
served in the Navy. That is the US
military is a drug-free environment. So,
our total culture was say no to drugs,
and it really is that way. I served 15
years before I knew anyone who even
touched drugs, and that was only because
I became the commanding officer of a
unit that discharged people who used
drugs. So, here I was in this totally
drug-free environment, and suddenly I'm
surrounded by just the very few people
who did use it, and they were kicked
out. So, that's my background around
drugs. Then I retired from the Navy, my
whole field as a medium opens up,
and I connected with I have connected
with a lot of souls who crossed from
drug overdoses, and souls
who
died the person human side of them died
because they did dangerous things while
using drugs unsupervised, like jumping
off of buildings. And I've dealt with
the mothers of children who suffered
because of that. So, that's my
background why I have not condoned the
use of psychedelics, and why personally
it's just a taboo subject for me.
However, I was introduced through
reading other books about consciousness
to Dr. Christopher Bache,
a professor Let me look at his
background here, Professor Emeritus in
the Department of Philosophy and
Religious Studies at Youngstown
Youngstown
Youngstown State
University, where he taught for 33
years.
He has other credentials that go on and
on, but what caught my attention was his
research into consciousness.
Four books, and I've read them all,
include
Lifecycles: A Study of Reincarnation in
Light of Contemporary Consciousness
Research, Dark Night, Early Dawn,
fabulous book about psychedelic
philosophy, The Living Classroom, I was
fascinated by this book, every word, An
Exploration of Collective Fields of
Consciousness in Teaching, and the one
book that I have gone back to over and
over, I own a hard copy, I have it on my
Kindle, sometimes I pick it up and read
it before I fall asleep, read the
closing
chapter for the insights that Dr. Bache
derived from his
explorations using LSD
over 20 years.
That book is called LSD and the mind of
the universe and I never told my husband
I was reading it cuz I knew what kind of
reaction I would get and that's that
culture. But I have to tell you and
Chris, I'm you're on screen now.
Everybody, from the moment I read that
book, I thought this man is the bravest,
most courageous explorer of
consciousness,
explorer of anything I have ever
encountered. Why? Because he repeatedly
entered states of consciousness knowing
he was going to experience
physical pain, emotional, spiritual
pain and trauma at a level that was
painful to even read about and he kept
going back and back and back from a
sincere desire to thoroughly learn about
consciousness. Chris, I'm sorry this is
a really long intro. We're going to get
to you and you're going to do almost all
the talking, but I just felt it was very
important to to make that preface there
and where's my page where I reached out
to him and said, "This is the way I'm
coming at this. I I have to do my own
apology at the beginning." But I want to
read what you wrote back to me if you
don't mind. Then we'll get into the
questions, okay?
Chris wrote, "I understand your caution
around psychedelics. There are more ways
to do this path wrong than do it right.
In addition, my work is not primarily
aimed at either therapeutic healing or
spiritual awakening, but cosmological
exploration. This distinction is often
missed by even sympathetic interviewers.
So, you can bet we're going to keep the
focus on that, Chris.
The cosmological protocol is more
demanding, boy was it. And has more more
pitfalls than either the therapeutic or
enlightened protocols. As I say in my
book, LSD in the mind of the universe, I
would not adopt the same protocol if I
were starting the journey over again
today. I would take a more nuanced
approach. Yours was like the 2 by 4 over
the head.
>> Yeah.
>> And with all that said, I would be glad
to have a a conversation with you. The
most important derivatives from my
journey
have nothing to do with psychedelics,
but with understanding, as you say, who
we really are and what matters most.
So,
thank you for putting up with that long
intro, but most of all, Dr. Bays, thank
you for coming on the show and and being
willing to share with all of us what you
learned from that journey.
>> Well, thank you, Suzanne, for that warm
opening and uh I really look forward to
where our conversation is going to go.
>> Okay, well,
I rarely have a list of questions. It
usually just uh flows generically and it
organically. It will do that, but I also
have certain questions that This is one
of those times, everybody, where you
have such an expert you're sitting with,
you don't want to finish and say, "Oh my
god, I wanted to ask this or that." So,
let's just uh
start off by saying you said your work
is about cosmological exploration rather
than spiritual awakening. What do you
mean by that?
>> Well, first I was trained as a
philosopher of religion. That's where I
finished my graduate work in.
And so, when I first read Stan Grof's
work book, his first book, Realms of the
Human Unconscious, and I had just
finished graduate school, I was looking
for where to take my research next. I
read Stan's book and and and he's one of
the world's foremost authorities on
integrating psychedelics into the
therapeutic process. And he already had
20 years of experience working with
psychedelics in Czechoslovakia, always
working within institutional frameworks.
And his work was so compelling and so
moving that I knew it had significance
not only for clinical psychology, but
also for my field, philosophy of
religion. And I knew that this work had
to be done personally. It had
in in order to pursue it effectively.
And I was uncomfortable breaking the
law. I'm a law-abiding person.
But uh and psychedelics had been made
illegal in 1970 and this was '78.
But I reluctantly started a a secretive,
a quiet, behind-the-scenes private
psychedelic practice in which I did 73
high-dose LSD sessions following Stan's
therapeutic protocol, always protected
from the world in a private room, lying
down, eye shades, uh headphones with
music very carefully selected music to
support the process.
>> And somebody to supervise, right? To be
there.
>> Yeah, I was I was always there with the
sitter who
uh happened to be my wife who was a
clinical psychologist.
Uh
so
basically, if looking at the overview, I
think they're kind of three ways in
which people who are serious about
psychedelics and not using them
recreationally, though there may be
nothing wrong with that, but serious
about it, use them for three purposes.
Well, let me back up.
I understand LSD particularly, but
psychedelics in general to be mind
amplifiers. They don't give you an
experience, they hyper-sensitize your
mind for hours at a time.
If you use that hyper-sensitivity
carefully,
it can bring forward the unconscious
elements of your own consciousness. So,
it it's very therapeutic it it can be
very therapeutically efficacious. And
that's the first reason that many people
use psychedelics is to heal the personal
psyche, the wounds of life. That's the
dominant way that psychedelics are being
used in the psychedelic renaissance
today.
>> And I read I'm very familiar with Dr.
Stanislav Grof's work and I I read that
and I see how people have been healed
from it and I and I feel that I wish
these weren't illegal for that reason
cuz it truly is therapeutic.
>> And I think we're coming into an era
where we're more mature in the way we're
approaching psychedelics now and we will
be bringing psychedelics back into our
therapeutic uh arsenal. I think
psilocybin and MDMA will probably be the
first candidates. They're so effective
in healing post-traumatic stress.
Uh and you know, that our veterans,
they need so much help and psychedelics
can really help them.
Um ibogaine is an African psychedelic
that can really interrupt uh narcotic
addiction, can give an interruption to
heroin and cocaine addiction to allow
conventional therapeutic uh measures,
interventions, a window of opportunity.
So, that's the the dominant way things
are used.
And a second area and way in which
they're used is to awaken, to
spiritually awaken or to awaken one to
the one's deeper nature, one's or deeper
spiritual nature, to open up a dialogue
with um
the underlying the life that runs
through all things, the essence of one's
spiritual being, which is the essence of
all things. Atman equals Brahman.
And and that's the these are
overlapping, but they're different. To
heal the wounds and to open one to the
spiritual fullness of life are sort of
two different
processes, but both of them usually
involve working with low doses of
psychedelics, more to gently unfold the
psyche.
I had deeper concerns, philosophical
concerns, and I was young. And I ended
up after three medium dose sessions, I
ended up doing uh working always with a
high dose of LSD, 500 to 600 micrograms,
which is a very high dose.
Which is a protocol that I don't
recommend today. Now that I know what
I've learned having gone through this
process, but basically the agenda is
uh
to really radically open one's
consciousness, to radically purify one's
consciousness so that one can open to
dimensions of mind which lie beyond the
personal psyche. Not bypassing one's
personal issues, but moving through them
into larger collective dimensions of
mind, the the personal, the collective
unconscious, and then moving beyond that
into deeper spiritual dimensions of
mind. And the reason I wanted to do this
was to see what these deep states of
consciousness could teach me about
reality that the reality that lies
behind the physical world. Uh this
was an inquiry into the deep structure
of spiritual reality.
And so that's that's what drove me,
that's what motivated me. And now I had
an advantage doing this work in that I
was a professor of religious studies. I
taught religious studies all my life. I
I had the opportunity to teach courses
in
Buddhism and comparative mysticism, so I
knew the deep mystical traditions well.
I also taught courses that includes the
study of near-death episodes,
episode research, reincarnation
research, which is another area of
interest of mine,
uh and also out of body research
and psychedelic research. So, I was
intellectually nourished by a wide
spectrum of work in transpersonal
psychology,
and that supported me as I entered this
territory, which was
in some ways familiar to me from my
spiritual studies, and in some ways
radically
new to me.
>> What I found so fascinating, and I know
you did as well, was how each session
built upon the last instead of being
stand alone. You just kept going deeper
and deeper. Would you talk about that,
please?
>> Well, this isn't the way it worked for
everybody, but it is the way it worked
for me. And I think one of the reasons
it worked this way for me had to do with
the standardization of the protocol that
I adopted, which meant that my set and
setting was always the same. I was
always working in the same modality. I
was using the same substance in the same
at the same dose level. So, it was
always opening me in a familiar pattern.
And I The second part of it is I always
worked very hard to remember and to
internalize and to integrate the lessons
that I was given in any one session. So,
if you if you show the universe that
you're listening carefully, you're
learning, and you are trying to live by
the teachings that you've been given,
then I think the universe pays more
attention to you. If you're just having
a good time and you're going to a
Grateful Dead concert, that that may be
fine, but it's not a serious engagement
with the deeper boundaries of of
consciousness.
And so, by standardizing
all the variables and focusing with a
serious intent and trying to maximize
the retention,
that meant when I went back the next
time, the universe tended to meet me
where I had stopped and it met me then
again and again and it systematically
took me under its wing and it educated
me. It taught me things
and then it put me through initiatory
processes and and and purification
processes
and took me on
the ride of a lifetime. It was a
philosophical dream come true.
>> Yes, you can put it in those stages but
I he details everybody exactly what he
went for because as he said he would
come out of it and write down everything
that happened and then integrate it over
time before diving right back in. But
you went back in knowing you're going to
be physically ill.
It's going to
feel like it's physically painful
and you'd be terrified to the point of
feeling like you are dying and sometimes
probably wishing you were dying because
it is so terrifying, right?
>> And that's you know that's people often
have a a misunderstanding of
psychedelics but
if you were to talk to many many serious
spiritually oriented psychedelic users,
they they expect this because when you
amplify your consciousness, your
consciousness takes the opportunity to
purify itself at levels and levels and
levels and and it forces you to confront
truths about yourself, truths about life
and your greatest fears and certainly
one of our greatest fears is fear of
death and you must confront that in
order to open beyond to that dimension
of your life where you are already
living the life divine, the life
eternal.
So yeah. Yeah.
>> So you talk about cosmological
exploration but from a spiritual
viewpoint this is so profoundly
important because I always use the
expression life is an acronym for love
in full expression.
>> Mhm.
>> And you experience the fullness of it.
It wasn't all torture and dying. It had
>> Mhm.
>> equally balanced beauty when you went
>> Yeah.
>> that process. And that's
>> what part of why we experience pain
here, for the contrast.
>> Yeah.
>> get to those states through
>> I think so.
>> cation.
>> Yeah, the typical pattern in my sessions
is that the first half was spent in
purification, some type of purification
ordeal, and then that would reach a
peak. And if you handle the peak care
well,
it will take you beyond that into very
powerful spiritual transpersonal places.
And in those places, you receive many
blessings, you receive many teachings.
So that at And then you eventually the
the drug wears off, you come back to
your ordinary state of consciousness 5
to 8 hours later. So what you
internalize is the entire cycle. There
is a period of purification followed by
a period of illumination.
And I was not a glutton for pain, but I
was a glutton for what lay on the other
side of that pain. The purification led
to ecstatic
it progressive initiation, immersion
into uh the body of the divine.
And the word God has a lot of
connotations that I really don't want to
import into the discussion because
you know, so much harm has been done in
the name of God. And there's so many you
know, limitations that have been built
into our religious history around the
word God. But
uh so that's why the book is not LSD in
the mind of God, it's LSD in the mind of
the universe, cuz the universe
is vast. I mean, we now know pretty much
how vast it is and how old it is. And
what I found was that this vast universe
has a mind. It it and it emerges out of
an even deeper mind. A mind which is so
profound and so vast that I think one
can speak of it as the divine mind. It
is the mind of the divine.
Uh
yeah.
>> And who and what are we in relation to
that?
>> Uh we are aspects of it. We are sparks
of its light. We are we are
manifestations
in fact I think the entire universe,
this is not an original cosmology for
me, it's an ancient cosmology.
Uh
that the physical universe is the
manifest body of the divine. That the
that the Hindus say God did not so much
create the world as he became the world.
And so that means everything that exists
is a is part of the manifestation the
self-manifestation of the divine.
And the essence of everything which
exists is the essence of the divine, the
core of the divine. Human beings and
ants and everything in the universe,
there is no second principle in
existence. It's all divine.
>> This is it and this is it and this is
what by a grace and by commitment to
daily sitting in the silence since 2006
I've come to personally experience
without the pain and the suffering at
the level you did and that's why your
book resonated with me from the start as
truth.
And
so I'm just grateful that we are given
glimpses of that through various means
and yours your book is so filled with
truth but at a depth that most people
don't personally experience like you did
that it's just it's so wise and I hope
that many people will read the wisdom in
there.
So it's not a mechanical universe,
right?
>> No, it's not a mechanical universe. It's
a universe filled with mystery and
wonder and joy. And when you experience
as you do in meditation, as you do in in
a near-death episode, or if you do in a
clean, clear psychedelic session, when
you experience the mind of the universe
and you experience the extraordinary
intelligence of it, and the wisdom of
it, just just super exponential
intelligence. But I was surprised also
to
experience that
the love, the the profound love that the
creator has in for its creation, its own
manifest being.
That just completely I mean, I was
expecting the intelligence, and I was
expecting the power.
But the magnitude of the love was truly
overwhelming at different points.
Yeah.
>> And I've come to define love as lack of
separation, uh total connection.
How would you
describe that?
>> Well, I agree with you. I think oneness
is a fundamental core spiritual truth,
and that
the universe, with all of its diversity
and all of its complexity, underneath
that
is one. It it lives as Plotinus said,
the world the universe
breathes as one, the world breathes as
one. And there are times when you're
blessed enough to be able to experience
that in in great intimacy.
And
to me, love is that kind of connective
tissue which holds the universe as
oneness underneath the diversity. So
love is the connective fiber
of oneness.
>> This This is is the awaken way
encapsulated. Absolutely. When we come
to know that, that's you can't help but
love. Uh
I'm jumping around a little bit here,
but what I understood, and I've seen
this a lot with people who have had
near-death experiences, is you after
experiencing that those ecstatic states
to the ultimate degree, something I
can't even imagine.
And well, oh.
I just heard you have known it before,
but we can't imagine it while we're in
these dense bodies and you expanded
beyond that and were able to experience
that at a level that even meditation
hasn't taken me to. You went through a
very long period of
tremendous depression.
Another challenge.
>> When I finished my journey, after 20
years in, when I was 50 years old and I
had finished my journey and I I knew
that it was time for me to stop. And the
universe met me at that point and the
universe kind of wrapped it up and told
me it was time to stop. And I thought
that I had experienced so many gifts in
this journey that I would be able to
just withdraw and be nourished by the
gifts that I had received.
Uh but what I found is more complicated
than that.
Uh because I had gone so deeply into the
divine
crystalline body, what I call the
diamond luminosity, the light of the
divine,
that uh I knew I would never experience
that again until I died.
Yeah. Uh cuz you can't take a large dose
of LSD and go there. I couldn't do that
now
no matter how much LSD I took because it
it it's a something you have to build
to. It's it's a training. It's like an
Olympic athlete training and you have to
build the resources to enter those
conditions.
So I knew it was
I would be I knew the joy was waiting
for me when I would die, but I knew that
I would never experience it again during
this lifetime.
And I began a a sadness began to settle
over me. The sadness of being separated
from the intimacy with the divine.
And this is something that near-death
episode people know well. Carl Jung
>> homesickness. Homesickness.
>> It's homesickness.
>> Yeah.
>> And it took me a while to really get
to overcome that and to understand it
because I had tried to
it basically is was my system was
yelling failure to integrate.
And I had been so careful to integrate
all my sessions. I didn't understand
what I had failed to integrate. So, but
I knew this was not the way it's
supposed to be. And so I really turned
to explore where I had made my mistake.
And in that process, eventually I came
to understand
that
uh what I was suffering from was too
much transcendence.
It's all God, you know, the physical
world is the divine, the spiritual world
is the divine. It's all God. So, it
wasn't technically too much God,
but it was too much the transcendent
divine.
And it overwhelmed my joy of living in
the immanent divine, in the physical
divine. And I had to the the degree of
imbalance was not clear to me as long as
I was going back regularly several times
a year into the divine state.
Now, once I stopped it, the imbalance
became clear. And I had to recommit
myself to living in the immanent divine.
>> This is beautiful because I in my book
The Awakened Way I I talk about this
analogy of having the human soul dial
where I say you you can be really
identified with yourself as a human or a
soul. And you go back and forth
throughout the day or throughout days
depending on your awareness and your
understanding. And we tend to think that
it's pretty awesome to be dialed up to
the soul side all the time. But what
you've just really illustrated is
that's not possible to maintain and can
lead to this depression. So that
balanced state is the integration.
>> Balance is a symptom of is a barometer
of
how much well you're handling
integration. Now there are some great
masters who can live in the divine
embrace every day
24/7 and and all honor and truly all
respect to them. I'm not one of those
masters. I'm much more an ordinary
person. Uh and I cannot sustain that. Uh
but there are some who can. But if
you know, the one thing about working
the psychedelic path in terms of its
spiritual ramifications is and it's
important to always keep it in mind,
it's a path of temporary immersion. It's
not permanent immersion. It's temporary
immersion. And there are other paths
like meditation which move more slowly,
but you get to keep more of what you
get. You know, it's a it's a slower melt
process, but there's a sense in which it
you you eventually can live within the
conditions that you touch.
>> Right.
>> And it's not just about what you get in
the moment, but what you do with your
life when you come out of it.
>> Yeah.
>> Meditation or otherwise.
>> Yeah, and and I always was meditating
while I was doing this work. I wasn't
only doing psychedelic work. In fact, I
believe that if you do use a path that
gives you temporary intense experience
access,
it's very important to have a daily
practice to stabilize those experiences
and help you absorb and integrate them
uh on a day-to-day basis. And so I was
always using both of those methods side
by side.
>> Wow.
>> Excellent.
>> So I do want to get back to the
cosmological questions, but one more and
it
goes hand in hand with the question so
many of my students and community ask,
which is
when I connect with higher
consciousness, how do I know it's not my
imagination? So, you're using a
substance to, as you said, amplify the
mind. How do we know that this is a
shared experience, that it is not just
simply Chris Bache's mind going crazy?
>> Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah, and the the question is the
same question if you use I'm sure you
encounter mediumship or meditation. How
do I know whether I'm listening to
something beyond myself or whether I'm
just listening to myself?
>> Yes.
>> And that also shows up in psychedelic
work.
Am I simply listening to something
that's coming from my personal psyche or
maybe I'm even listening to something
which is bouncing off back echo of the
collective psyche? How do I know this is
something that can be trusted?
And I'll tell you
a good friend of mine, Ken Ring, who's
>> Oh, we're friends. Yeah, good.
>> He's a good He's a great guy. He's a
good friend of mine. Founder of the
Journal of Near-Death Studies, author of
many books on Near-Death Episode
Research, which I've used in my classes
for years.
He pressed me after he read LSD in the
Mind of the Universe. He He pressed me
hard on this issue. How do you know it's
not just personal? How do you know it's
not Would Would a Hindu who grew up in a
completely different, you know,
intellectual framework, would he have
the same experience as you had? And so,
he and I went back and forth on a series
of exchanges.
And eventually we decided it was
productive enough that we had published
it. And we published it online and it's
in an article called Are Deep
Psychedelic Experiences Trustable?
A dialogue between Ken Ring and and
Chris Bache.
And you can Google it and it's it's
online, it's available.
And there
I give reasons for why I think they're
trustable. One of them is some
psychedelic experiences
having to do with things that are taking
place in the physical world can be
checked and verified by what's actually
happening in the physical world.
Sometimes people acquire knowledge that
they never had before about subtle
animal physiology or, you know, things
like this and they can explore and
verify that that in fact is legitimate
knowledge.
When you take the same method and you
apply it to deeper levels of
consciousness, you obviously come into
territory where you can't do that.
Spiritual knowledge cannot be verified
in the same way.
>> Right.
>> Yeah.
>> But there is a
but it can be collectively verified.
That is, is it replicable? Do different
people have the same kind of experiences
of these realities? And here I would
point to someone like Stan Grof who has
worked with hundreds and hundreds of
people, thousands of experiences, and
he's tabulated and cross-referenced them
and collected the patterns. And there
you have really a good solid
self-verified
uh I'm let me say a verified database
that there is a commonality. There's a
there's a an overlapping trajectory of
people moving deeper and deeper into
these states. Now, when you're staying
at the level of the personal psyche in
the early stages,
people's experiences varies widely
because we all have different personal
histories.
But when you cross what I would call the
existential threshold, when you
transition from your personal issues to
universal existential issues, life and
death, is there continuation of of life
after death? Uh is there any meaning to
our lives? When you transition from
that,
people's experiences tend to become more
uniform and more consistent. And then
when you enter into communion with
spiritual reality, there's a wide
overlap between the types of experiences
that people have. So, if you know Stan's
work, and you do, you know that my work
fits very comfortably within the context
of Stan's work. I have my own particular
emphases, but it fits within that
verifiable larger cross cross verifi-
verified phenomena. So, I think there
can be good there's a good intellectual
argument for why we think we're not just
listening to our own navel.
>> Absolutely. And that you just answered
the same way we do in mediumship.
>> Really?
>> Absolutely. Yeah. Verifying things that
we can't have possibly known. And then
the shared
experience.
>> there there's the other aspect, which is
more you have to experience it to get
it, and that is the inherent nature of
the experience themselves.
When I went into, for example, arche-
what I understand to be archetypal
reality, or the the domain of those
structures, which are the creative
structures of existence, more
fundamental than time and space,
I repeatedly had the experience
I was entering a level of reality that
was more real than time and space. More
real. That was unnerving at first.
But the age,
and then and more real, that this is
ontologically more fundamental than
anything which occurs inside the
fleeting world of time and space.
That is a not only replicated in other
people's experiences, but it has an
inherent truth about it. And when you
enter, likewise, into deep
um
what I call the diamond luminosity.
They're the crystalline body of the
divine.
That has an overwhelming existential
truth about it that you could never
doubt. Anyone like someone who has a
near-death episode and they enter the
white light and they enter into
communion with it, they could never ever
doubt the truth of that.
But somebody who hasn't had that
experience, I understand why they might
doubt that.
>> That's right. That's right. I remember a
a gentleman that wrote to me and he
said, "I was just visited by my wife."
And this 86-year-old man was sobbing
like a baby and nobody can tell me that
wasn't real. It's what you've just said
it to encapsulate is the knowing, just
the knowing. And your description there
of of the deeper structures beyond space
and time Now I have to go back and read
the whole book again cuz your
descriptions are so exacting and so
descriptive and we don't have to suffer
to
read and learn about it by reading your
simply by reading your book, which is so
wonderful.
>> know, I spent after I finished my
sessions, I spent 20 years digesting
them, thinking about them, pondering
them, trying to internalize them. And
I'm still This is open-ended. I'm still
integrating these sessions into my life.
I think it'll be lifetimes for me to do
so. But I spent so much time pondering
them that I had to learn
how to speak about them, how to talk
about them. So I've had a lot of
practice on that.
>> Yes, and and the minute documentation as
a researcher and professor that you did
to capture every nuance immediately
before you forgot it, before it got
tainted by memory Yeah. Yeah, is
>> That's really important.
>> It's invaluable to all of us what you
did. So grateful for that.
>> Well, you You when I was doing it
I didn't have a plan.
I know I knew that maybe someday I would
be able to make them of use,
but I didn't have a plan and and in the
years when I was doing this,
psychedelics were so
off the table of discussion, I didn't
really I didn't know how it happened.
But then just before LSD in the mind of
the universe came out, the year before
Michael Pollan published his book, which
was his book um How to change your mind,
and it was such a wonderful introduction
to the field of psychedelic research, to
the people involved, that it just made
the discussion available uh the to
middle-class America to have a good
discussion about psychedelics.
You know.
But when I was when I was done with the
sessions and I was writing working on
prepare and it took me 5 years to write
the book even after I started it.
The mother said to me, she said uh
We didn't give you those ex- You didn't
give yourself those experiences.
We gave you those experiences.
We didn't give them to you just for you.
We gave them to you to hold in trust for
the for the whole human family.
You and I cuz I really was reluctant to
share them because
you know, this these experiences are so
intimate and so personal
that it's like inviting someone to
into your sex life. It's very intimate
and it was I'm a private person by
nature, so it's it was hard for me
to let these go open. But she said, We
didn't give them to you to to hold for
yourself. You've been holding them in
trust. You have to let go. They and it
they'll be of use to other people that
you've never met before
and they are on their own spiritual
path. They are on their own path of
self-discovery and it'll support them.
And so let it go. And so that's what I
did. I I got myself into a place where I
just let him go and let them into the
world.
>> And I know and I have to jump on this
one when the moment you said and the
mother said to me that everybody went
What did he just say?
Please talk about that. Who's this
mother?
>> Well, I know that the divine transcends
all sexual categories and but for and
for millennia we've been thinking of the
talking about the divine as a he and
we're now know that there's a real
downside to that.
But my reasons for talking about the
mother are a little more personal and
intimate. Um
at one point in my journey
I was
I was in a phase of work of what I call
the cosmological education. I was being
basically given a course in cosmology
101.
And at one point I was taken apparently
back to before creation and I
experienced the Big Bang in this state.
And I experienced an extraordinary love
that lay behind creation. And this love
was a
was a love between two divine beings
which had emerged out of a primal one.
The one had separated into two, the yin
and the yang,
the masculine feminine.
And in this one of the beings had stayed
outside and the other being had began
the process of manifesting the physical
universe, of immersing and creating the
physical universe. And it was I mean I
know that these categories are awkward,
but it was the feminine divine which
manifested creation and the masculine
divine which stayed out in the
transcendent domain.
And eventually the feminine divine would
lose its consciousness as it became more
and more material until such point that
matter began to manifest its internal
capacity for consciousness and we became
more and more consciousness until
eventually species became conscious and
they were able to return in their
consciousness to the original
father divine. And so
uh
for me
the physical universe
is the manifestation of the great
mother.
Uh and I mean the prayers they sing
Gratia Padre, Gratia Madre, Gratia
Padre, Gratia Padre. I mean thank you
father, thank you mother, thank you
father, thank you mother.
But in terms of manifestation and in
terms of serving
the evolution of
the consciousness within the physical
universe it's more natural for me to
sort of think of that as the mother.
And I there's another aspect to it is
that when you go into these deep unitive
states and you come back out there's a
longing
that is
very deep and there's
there's this kind of quasi romantic
longing just to reunite to reach to
experience again the union.
And so that that also plays into the
formula.
>> Beautiful.
Wow.
Okay.
I'm being guided to go back to my list
now. See where we go with this.
Oh my gosh, we've covered a lot already.
Uh your experiences led you to explore
questions like why life is difficult,
what suffering is for, where evolution
is taking us.
What insights emerge for you about the
purpose of human struggle if there is a
purpose at all to it. Or if is it is it
just an artifact of the fullness of life
expressing itself?
>> Well, that you know, to take on the
question of human suffering, of
suffering, not just human suffering, but
suffering in the world.
>> Yeah.
>> That's one of the hard, hard questions
and deep, deep questions. And in order
to even try to give any make any sense
of it,
you have to be willing to reach very,
very deep into existence, because on the
surface,
you won't be able to find, I think, a
satisfactory answer, and you take
shortcuts.
Uh you have to go very, very deep into
the fabric of existence. And when you
do, there's certain things that stand
out that reframe our experience of
suffering. One of them is um
the divine or the what I call the
creative intelligence does not think in
short term. It doesn't think small
things very large. And the divine thinks
in terms of not even just just
individuals, though very concerned with
individuals, but with whole species and
whole ecosystems. And thinks on a time
scale that just
boggles our mind.
The the divine is not interested so much
in the next hundred or thousand years so
much as the next million, the next
billion, the next 13.7 billion years.
It's a long developmental process. Sri
Aurobindo, the great Hindu sage, Oxford
educated Hindu sage, he grasped this and
he said,
"Man, or humanity, is a transitional
being.
We're not finished.
The creator isn't finished with us. We
are at a stage in our evolutionary
development, and there are more
progressive stages coming."
And some of the reasons of suffering is
because of the unfinishedness of the
human condition. If you're building a
house and you put some walls up but you
don't have the roof up yet, well, when
it rains, naturally the rain is going to
get in the inside. And in a sense, the
human condition is profoundly
incomplete. We do not have
total control of our body by our mind.
But we're getting more and more control
of our body over our mind. We cannot
manifest
powerfully
the intentions that emerge out of the
soul, that emerges much more
complicatedly, so that we create for
ourselves positive and negative
experiences in our learning. But we are
getting eventually, I think, we will
have a much greater control of our
creative ability and we will create only
good. Uh
But we're on the
>> If I may my I've asked this question in
meditation quite often and even in
channeling sessions, my guides try to
bring humor into it and when people are
dismayed and they say, "This is
terrible. Aren't we growing at all?
Everything is horrible. Look at the
news." And it's easy to go there with
the small vision. But they jokingly say,
"You have been through the dark ages.
What you're in now are what we would
call the dim ages, which is an
improvement."
>> It is an improvement.
>> It's not as dark It's still very dim for
us, but it This is the long game, like
you said.
>> long game. And uh I mean
I think humanity is on the cusp of
making a quantum jump in our
evolutionary form. You know, there was a
time in our past where suddenly, we By
suddenly, I mean 100,000 years,
humanity increased its brain size 50%.
It didn't do it. Nature did it. Nature
started giving us this 50% bigger brain.
I think something is happening now in a
way that we aren't producing, we're
cooperating with it, but nature or the
creative intelligence within nature is
taking humanity through a metamorphosis
into a profound spiritual explosion, a
spiritual growth, an an opening of the
human heart to experience true oneness.
And and an opening of our mind to our
own deep history, our reincarnational
history.
And in that process, I think nature is
in the process of giving birth to what I
call the future human. And different
people, it's a very common insight these
days. Homo spiritualis, Homo noeticus,
Homo luminous. Uh that we are giving
birth to an the next child, the next
iteration of human being, where we will
show more control over our bodies, more
self-awareness, more ability to create
harmony and and concord in society. And
when we finish this transition,
however long it will take, I don't know
how long it'll take, 100 years, more
than 100 years,
that's just the next stage.
>> That's right.
>> The divine isn't stopping there. It's
going to go more and more and more.
I think when we, you know, it's like
I personally think that we have been
gestating the future human for thousands
and thousands of years.
I believe in reincarnation. I think
there's overwhelming empirical evidence
that reincarnation is just a fact of
life. My first book was on
reincarnation, life after life.
>> I you you gratefully you granted me a
chat just the two of us several years
ago to talk about reincarnation. You
really helped me reframe what I'd gotten
from my guides, put it into words we can
understand. So, yeah, read his book
about reincarnation, folks.
>> And and so I think we've been living and
growing and living and growing and
refining and becoming more and making
up, you know, making correcting our
mistakes, building on our strengths for
a long, long time, but now
you know, gestation is long, labor is
short and intense. When the waters
break, every mother knows it's going to
be a very intense day. It's a dangerous
time. It's a day of extraordinarily hard
work, but at the end of the day, if all
goes well, we have a new life and
there's a fundamental in which we forget
our pain.
Because this life is so beautiful in the
world.
>> That's right.
>> that's true for spiritual development,
too. We have been growing and growing
and growing, but we are about to give
birth to a new form of humanity, a
higher form of humanity, a more
spiritually realized form of humanity.
And when we do, we will look back upon
all the pain that we've suffered over
all those centuries and we will say, "It
was worth it."
>> Amen.
>> that it's insignificant, but it's worth
it to give birth to this.
>> Yes, sir. And how many of you have said
to me or to your friends,
"I am want to get it right this time cuz
I am not coming back." And then, Chris,
you go and you experience those states
and you see what it's all about and you
we do come back
for all of it.
Yeah.
>> You know, I think that the traditional
way of reincarnation cultures have
thought about reincarnation is you
develop, you develop, you develop until
eventually you reach a place of
spiritual maturity, you reach Nirvana or
you you achieve moksha, escape in the
Hindu tradition.
>> Mhm. And
>> you not only achieve a spiritual
breakthrough,
but when you die, you don't have to come
back.
And so, it's what I call an up-and-out
cosmology. So, the the goal is to
achieve salvation or some higher state
and then you
you take the reward in some off-planet
paradise.
>> Mhm.
>> And I I understand how that thinking
came into being because when we began to
have access to spiritual reality about
5,000 years ago when we began to drop
down and get in touch with the
underlying structures of our
consciousness,
we encounter extraordinary bliss, just
ecstatic bliss. How could we not think
but that we fell out of that, that
that's home. We know it's home. It shows
itself to be home.
We're are we being punished here? Our
goal is to get back to there and that
leads to an up and out cosmology.
But now what that leaves unexplained is
what's the purpose of time and space? Is
it simply an obstacle course to help us
develop to get out of it?
And now I think we're beginning to
understand the deeper intention of the
divine.
The goal in reincarnation is not simply
to achieve a breakthrough of
transcendence and then to leave, is to
achieve a breakthrough to spiritual
transcendent reality and then to
incarnate that transcendence more and
more deeply into our bodies, into Earth.
That I think is the emerging spiritual
paradigm.
>> That's it. And we do that
in like your other book, cycles and
cycles and growing ever more brighter,
more luminous. It's this I'd say we come
here to shine our light more brightly
than we came in shining it. And we do
that in this lifetime and in subsequent
lifetimes and we just don't know how
bright it can go.
>> Yeah. And I understand when people have
worked really hard, they say, "I don't
want to come back." I really understand
that. And fortunately, when they go
return to spirit and they return home,
they are nourished and taken care of and
they get a big vacation in spiritual
reality.
But then there comes a time when the
divine says, "Are you ready?
Do you love me enough? Will you give
your life to me again and help me create
what we're creating inside time and
space. And who would turn down an
invitation like that? So, we come back
again to do it even better and do more
and more and more.
>> Oh my gosh.
I love this conversation so much.
>> I'm enjoying it, too. Really. I love
your questions and your questioning. I
love what you're bringing to the
conversation.
>> It just speaks so much of truth and
there may be people that that kick and
scream. Okay, good. I just got a
question from my guides.
I get a message in in awareness and
meditation every morning from my guides
and this morning's was a statement that
I've used before
and people
don't like it. You're never given more
than you can handle.
People don't like that because
it hurts so much sometimes we say, I
can't handle this and why do I have to
handle this? And I got an answer from
spirit this morning. It's explained in
today's daily message. We're recording
this on March
9th.
Is this March
>> March 10th.
>> March 10th. That's right. So, you can
look at the message on March 10th, but
what would you say to that statement?
You're never given more than you can
handle.
>> I think that's generally true. I think
it's generally true because I think
first of all, I think we choose the
incarnation before we incarnate, we know
what we're getting into. We Our
spiritual guides give us show us
what's likely outcome, what's the
trajectory, at least an initial
trajectory of our lives. And we're
shown, you know, Michael Newton's work
in his books Journey of Souls and
Destiny of Souls, Past Life Therapists
exploring
what his patients to have taught him
about their experiences in the interlife
condition.
>> Yep.
>> He says people get to choose their
incarnation. So, I think in that respect
there are no volunteers. I mean, sorry,
there are no victims. There are only
volunteers. Then we wonder, well, why
would somebody volunteer to have such a
hard life? But to understand that, we
have to stop thinking like a little
human being and start thinking like a
soul.
>> That was the gist of the message.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Widen the lens.
>> Widen the lens and understand why
sometimes it's to purify, we're working
off the thought of residue of our
previous mistakes, we're working them
out of the system. Sometimes I think
people suffer not because of mistakes
they've made, but because of mistakes
that other people have made and they are
working helping them work off their
karma.
>> That's it. That's it.
>> You know, it's it's sacrificial death.
You know, what mother would not give of
herself to save her child's suffering?
And I think that's also true of of
spiritual on spiritual terms. We take on
suffering of others to help them in
their life's work. I think there are
many, many bodhisattvas in the world who
basically take on burdens that are
technically not their own, but they do
so joyfully because it helps the human
family.
>> And this leads to a great realization
you had about the different levels of
growth that at first it was a personal
journey, then you realized how much of
this is a collective journey of humanity
and it got bigger and bigger and part of
our challenge here is when it's all
about me
or then it then it becomes about my
tribe.
And so you can see where people are in
their developmental process and you got
to see
beyond what most people do. Would you
talk about the collect the growth of the
collective and then what's beyond that?
>> Well,
you know, some people who work
shamanically with psychedelics have
great encounters, powerful encounters
with the animal realm and the plant
realm and the and the consciousness of
animals and plants. And I haven't and
people ask me, "Why haven't you? Why
didn't you?" And the closest I've been
able to come to understand is because
to me
the most dangerous species on the planet
right now is humanity.
If we can heal humanity, then all the
other species will be safe.
I think we are in the process of healing
humanity.
And in my work after about 2 and 1/2
years of working on my own issues,
suddenly I was drawn into humanity's
issues. I was drawn into episodes of
what I call the ocean of suffering
where I was experiencing the lives and
sufferings of thousands of human beings
and thousands of years and I learned
that
>> once. Just All at once.
Powerful.
>> And so that I learned that everything
which is unresolved in human history
isn't just carried forward in the
individual souls incarnating their
individual solutions, but it's kind of
lodged it gets lodged in the collective
psyche. And there's all the pain and
suffering of all those wars and and
droughts and violence is still
congested in the collective psyche.
And
we have an opportunity through all sorts
of methods, meditation, psychedelics,
spiritual practice, to sort of take some
of that suffering not into us, but
through us and let it come into our
awareness and then through us to be
dissolved in the universe at large.
Eventually,
so I spent 2 years doing that work. And
then I was taken into a deeper level
into a deeper level. And what I And this
is There's a chapter in the book called
The Birth of the Future Human where I
kind of gather together all the visions
that I was given about humanity coming
to this turning point, a radical before
and after pivot into a deeper spiritual
realization, and the period of suffering
that would precede it because in every
mystical development, before mystics
blossoms into full non-dual oneness
consciousness,
there comes a period of of purification,
which we call often the dark night of
the soul. It's a very difficult time
when we're kind of sweating out our
sins. It's a dark night of where we
sweat our past conditioning out. And I
think before humanity to have a truly
um
great spiritual rebirth,
there must first take pace place the
dark night of our collective soul. We
must kind of bring forward all the
ignorance, all the errors, all the
violence of our history. We must face
it, first of all, own it, and basically
say, "No. We can do better than this. We
can choose inclusive. We can choose
peace. We We can We have to let go of
that past in order to open
cuz
to the divine, and the divine doesn't
have favorites. The divine doesn't have
one race that it favors over another, or
one religion that it favors over
another, or even one species that it
favors over another. It's It's either
all distinctions are no distinctions,
and the divine is only interested in no
distinctions. It doesn't mean there
aren't differences, but
an inclusive whole, which holds all of
humanity, all of life,
in the embrace of the divine awareness.
I think we're going into hard times, but
these hard times are not meaningless.
They are filled with meaning. And if we
navigate this well, if we do a good job
of just doing our particular small part
in this transition, living as deeply as
we can, as cleanly as we can, we then
do our make our contribution to the
transformation of the entire human race,
and in that, the entire planet. And just
imagine
what
a species of enlightened beings could
accomplish.
>> I do imagine it every day. Every day.
>> Mhm.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
>> Ooh.
You just answered so many questions all
at once, so I don't even need to go
there. And
And
I hope people will take the time to dive
into your work and savor it and savor
each experience and feel the pain you
endured and
relate that to their own lives, their
own suffering, and and then feel the
the insights and the growth that ensued
from that and the joy and the ecstatic
states and feel the cyclical nature of
all of this
as
we could just go round and round and
round with this for hours. I know I
could.
>> And to feel, I mean, really it's what's
important is psychedelics are not
important. They just were my vehicle.
Other people have different vehicles.
What's important is the cosmology, the
vision of the love and the intelligence
and the wisdom that's built into the
fabric of existence that allows us to
look at the breadth of of the universe
and not feel small and insignificant,
but feel our age. We
our age and our life experience puts us
on a par with everything that's evolving
around us. So, the feeling of inclusion,
the feeling of homeship of home, the
feeling of one with all of life, and
that's a tremendously exhilarating
feeling. And above all, to give up all
fear of death.
And because you know, just
if there were one thing that I wish I
could reach into my heart and give
people, as I'm sure you do,
is to give up all fear of dying. Because
this is the hard place. We We got it all
backwards. This is the hard place.
When we die, we're going home. We're
going into the graduation. We're going
into the joy of of life.
When we're born,
this is when the hard work begins.
>> And you just answered my final question.
What's the single most important shift
in perspective you would invite people
to consider? I would say that that
encapsulates it. But there is a
follow-on question. What do you say to
those who are in the midst of the dark
night of the soul? And we're sitting
here talking about this beautiful home
that awaits us. What do you tell people
that encourages them to stay here and
get through it?
>> To know that what they're suffering,
what they're enduring, is not accidental
and is not meaningless. That it's filled
with meaning.
And that
it's part of their own developmental
process. It's part of their own
purification process. And I say this
with deep respect that I don't need to
know the details. And I I understand the
impenetrability
of the ways in which people are asked to
suffer.
Uh but
I would offer them the the thought that
there is meaning in this suffering. And
there is growth waiting for them in this
suffering. And that they can trust life.
Don't let it take away their trust of
life. And don't let it tell them that
they're not worthy and not beautiful
because they are worthy and they are
beautiful. And it's if they can just
hold fast, there is a light at the end
of the tunnel.
You may reach it in this lifetime. You
may reach it tomorrow. You may not reach
it in this lifetime until you die. But,
there is always light at the end of the
tunnel. So, hold fast, hold strong.
>> Wow, Dr. Christopher Base
sharing his wisdom with us today,
hard-earned wisdom over decades.
Thank you for
coming here today to share this with all
of us. Uh
>> Thank you for sharing, allowing me to
share these ideas with your community.
It's a true honor uh to do so and to be
in conversation with you, really.
>> All right, everybody. I hope this is one
you're going to want to go back to and
watch over and over. Please share it
with your friends.
This is the kind of information that's
life-changing and
that more people need to hear. Thank you
so much for joining us today.
>> Much love.
>> Great week. Thank you.